Project Gutenberg's Le Système Solaire se mouvant, by August Tischner

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Le Système Solaire se mouvant

Author: August Tischner

Release Date: November 25, 2010 [EBook #34435]

Language: French

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LE SYSTÈME SOLAIRE SE MOUVANT ***




Produced by Thorsten Kontowski, Hélène de Mink and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This book was produced from scanned images of public
domain material from the Google Print project.)







  Note de transcription:

  Cette version électronique reproduit, dans son intégralité, le
  texte d'origine avec toutes ses incohérences, tant du point de vue
  de l'orthographe et du vocabulaire que de la grammaire.

  Les mots et phrases imprimés en gras dans le texte d'origine sont
  marqués =ainsi=.




LE SYSTÈME SOLAIRE
SE MOUVANT.


  On est dans une grande erreur, quand on suppose, que les
    astronomes et ceux qui s'occupent de l'astronomie, ont par cette
    raison, en général, plus de capacité et d'intelligence que les
    autres mortels, qui cultivent la science.


PAR
AUGUST TISCHNER.


LEIPZIG
GUSTAV FOCK

1894.




LE SYSTÈME SOLAIRE SE MOUVANT.




Le système solaire se mouvant.


Que _la théorie astronomique actuelle_ se trouve dans un état
pitoyable, nous avons déjà montré dans nos brochures, qui sont nommées
à la fin de ce livre.

Dans la brochure présente nous avons quitté _l'hypothèse de Copernic_,
fondée sur le soleil fixe au centre de l'univers et proposons un
système solaire fondé sur le soleil se mouvant dans l'espace.

C'est tout indifférent quelles idées on se fait sur la mécanique
céleste, si elles sont seulement rationnelles, mais jamais on y
parviendra à prouver, qu'elles sont la vraie explication de la
réalité.

       *       *       *       *       *

C'est tout clair, que l'attraction continuelle du soleil fixe rend
impossible la circulation des planètes _en orbites formées autour de
lui_; les planètes circulent _autour de la ligne du mouvement du
soleil_, elles doivent suivre le mouvement du soleil, en circulant
_autour de la ligne de sa marche_.

Nous voulons maintenant proposer un système solaire dans lequel
_l'arrangement des planètes_ est tel quelles se rapportent au soleil
se mouvant dans l'espace.

Après le soleil, _qui marche au-devant des planètes_, comme le noyau
d'une comète, viennent rangées l'une après l'autre les planètes des
quelles les courves révolutives deviennent toujours plus grandes,
selon leur distance du soleil, comme si elles représentaient autant
de pendules centrifuges, dont les fils partent du centre du soleil.

Si les planètes sont toutes en circulation et le soleil est admis, en
pensées, immobile, les fils (radii vectores) décrivent _des cônes
réguliers_, dont la base est _perpendiculaire_ sur l'axe du cône. La
circonférence de cette base du cône est ce que nous nommons la _curve
révolutive originaire_. Si les cônes sont dans le même angle ils
semblent ne faire qu'un seule et les planètes circulent sur la surface
du cône. A en juger d'après les observations il semble en effet que
les cônes sont presque dans le même angle et que par suite de cette
position le zodiaque à été a considéré comme une borne commune des
orbites.

La _projection centrale des anneaux des orbites_ est naturellement un
_cercle_, qui _par la projection_ se change en ellipse quelconque. Vus
du soleil les orbites des planètes _paraissent projetées_ dans une
configuration, qui représentent exactement le diagramme de Copernic;
le soleil est au milieu de toutes les orbites et les planètes semblent
circuler autour de son centre.

Le _cône_ même montre le système _vu de côté_; si les curves sont dans
le même angle, alors la grandeur des orbites--leur demi-diamètre--se
rapportent comme la distance du soleil. C'est clair que d'aucune
planète cette curve peut être vue d'une autre planète _comme
centrale_, il faut qu'elles se représentent comme _cercles
excentriques_ ou elliptiques. La terre en rapport à une autre planète
vient dans des différentes positions, aussi dans une telle que ses
satellites montrent des orbites projetées centralement.

Si le soleil se meut, alors la direction de son mouvement est _l'axe
commun du cône_, c. a. d. que les planètes circulent autour de la
linge décrite par le soleil dans l'espace, que ligne nous pouvons
nommer _l'orbite du soleil_.

Par le mouvement propre du soleil les anneaux du mouvement des
planètes considérées jusqu'à présent, comme des _courves planes_, sont
changées _en spirales_, qui sont d'autant plus étendues ou alongées,
que la vitesse du soleil est plus grande en comparaison de la _propre_
vitesse de la planète: ces courves de _double courbure ne sont plus
perpendiculaires à l'axe du cône_ ou sur l'orbite du soleil, mais
elles ont une inclinaison vers lui, ce qui est indiqué _par l'angle du
cône_.

Supposons que le soleil se meut _en ligne droite_, alors les anneaux
des spirales, qui sont décrites par les planètes forment un _cylindre
droit_ dont le diamètre est égal au diamètre _de la courve révolutive
originaire_ ou _à l'anneau spiral_: dans ce cas on pourrait nommer
_les spirales cylindrique_, par ce que les anneaux suivant les uns les
autres, ont le même diamètre et la même position. Mais c'est clair que
le soleil _ne pouvant pas se mouvoir en ligne droite_, se meuve aussi
dans une curve; ainsi le cylindre, que nous nous sommes représenté
recevra une courbure. C'est bien clair, que les diamètres _des anneaux
spirales_ ne sont pas changés par cette _troisième_ courbure, mais la
projection de ceux-ci est modifiee.

En regardant de cette manière le cône--la figure cônique du système
solaire--recevra une faible courbure, et présentera l'image, qui nous
rappelle à la figure d'une corne d'abondance.

La section centrale--en longeur de l'axe--_du cône courbé_ est un
triangle sphèrique. Vu centralement le soleil _ne se trouve plus au
centre de toutes les orbites_--anneaux spirales--mais il se produiront
les _excentricités_ et les _inclinaisons apparentes_ des orbites l'une
vers l'autre.

La terre est peu éloignée de la pointe du cône--du soleil--et se meut
sur sa surface; les positions continuellement changeantes et variables
des planètes elle voit _perspectivement_, chaque moment du mouvement
il y a _une autre projection_.

Si on se représente, que toutes les planètes sont situées dans la même
ligne sur la surface du cône, cela est comme si l'on disait, que les
planètes inferieures, Mercure et Venus sont en même temps en
conjonction et les planètes superieres Mars, Jupiter, Satourne, Uranus
et Neptune en opposition d'après le système de Copernic; cette
position de toutes les planètes avait déjà été considérée par les
anciens et leur retour nommé la grande période. Que cette période soit
agrandie par les deux nouvelles planètes Uranus et Neptune c'est
clair.

Ce qui concerne les périodes et les positions des corps du système
solaire se mouvant dans l'espace, leur changement est peu apparent,
parce que _l'entier reste ensemble_ et par conséquent la _figure du
système_ n'est pas changée. Les distances relatives sont enchainées au
mouvement réglé: si d'après cela l'observation des corps appartenant
au système solaire était suffisante à l'astronomie, alors les
phénomènes pourraient être reduits à leur plus grande simplicité; mais
comme pour comparaison le ciel sert de fondement et base, il s'ensuit
une complication d'après laquelle le ciel étoilé entier semble lui
même se déplacer comme un entier dans l'espace.

Considérons _la figure cônique du système solaire_ sous condition, que
le soleil est _immobile_, alors les planètes peuvent décrire des
_courves fermées_, c. a. d. qu'elles _circulent constamment dans les
mêmes courves planes_, que nous avons nommées l'anneau ou la courve
révolutive originaire de la planète et qui ne change pas d'endroit
dans l'espaces, par la raison que ces _plans_, d'après les idées
d'aujourd'hui doivent être considérés comme _invariables_; mais ceci
fait présumer une autre condition indispensable, d'après laquelle
_l'attraction solaire_ n'exige aucun autre effet sur les planètes, que
celui qui est nécessaire pour conserver _l'équilibre du système
solaire_ et la _distance invariable_ de ces corps du soleil, afin
qu'aucune planète ne s'approche de lui et qu'aucune ne puisse
s'éloigner, cette condition reste invariable avec le système solaire
se mouvant et l'attraction du soleil se reduit à la communication de
sa propre vitesse, par suite de là _les courves révolutives
originaires se changent en spirales_. Par cet effet de l'attraction
c'est concevable que les planètes doivent rester nécessairement dans
la même distance du soleil.[A]

  [A] C'est difficile à comprendre comment l'attraction, une force
  dont la quantité et la grandeur sont données _par les masses
  invariables du soleil et la terre_ est alternativement _croissante
  ou décraissante_. Mais si on ajoute encore, que la vitesse de
  cette force est _infinie_ et par conséquant sa prétendue action
  _est en même temps momentane_, on est tout à fait troublé et
  stupifié. Où est le motif, où est la cause du decroissement d'une
  force dont la grandeur et l'action _sont constantes et momentans_
  et dont _la vitesse est infini_? C'est une des questions à
  laquelle la physique ne donne pas de réponce? Vide: Le pouvoir
  grossisant de l'atmosphère par August Tischner.

Que l'alongation des spirales dépend du rapport entre la vitesse
correspondante du soleil et des planètes et d'une planète et de ses
satellites c'est clair. Cette étendue de l'alongation de la courve
révolutive est en même temps l'inclinaison (ou déclinaison c'est égal)
de _l'orbite spirale_ vers l'axe du système solaire (orbite solaire ou
l'équateur céleste); l'angle de l'inclinaison est ainsi donné par la
_propre vitesse_ de la planète et de celle du soleil. Que la _vitesse
d'entrainement_ la même pour toutes les planètes du système solaire,
c'est compréhensible.

On voit que si on aperçoit au ciel étoilé un déplacement perceptible
du soleil, qui parait indépendant _du double mouvement de la terre_,
mais qui est accusé clairement par les étoiles (50'', 25, la
praecession) on peut conclure avec certitude, que c'est la suite du
mouvement propre du soleil ou du mouvement de son système dans
l'espace.

En continuant nos différents regards nous pouvons apporter quelque
clarté à la question concernant les _révolutions_ et les _temps de
révolutions_. Le _déplacement continuel du soleil_ stipule le
changement continuel des planètes et de leur circulation sans
interruption; il y a donc un mouvement sans interruption du même
mouvement et ni une révolution proprement dite, ni un temps de
circulation. Une période de révolution est ainsi _le retour du même
phénomène_ ou de la _même position apparente au ciel_, elle est
_relative_, elle est _coïnidence_. Que ces coïncidences reviennent
périodiquement, quelles reviennent régulièrement, c'est selon toute
vraisemblance l'ouvrage _de l'attraction_ universelle.

Il se demand maintenant, quelle phénomène de retour est à considerer
comme une révolution ou période révolutive accomplie et _à quoi_ cette
période a à se rapporter? La science _théorique_ s'est décidée pour la
révolution _sidérale_, comme il semble dans l'intention de déterminer
une conformitée parmi tous les corps du système solaire, que la
_théorie_ n'a pas fondé son _choix_ ou sa _decision_ sur une
conception rationelle, qui ressort de l'étude des phénomènes, elle a
_prouvé_, en rapportant la rotation de la terre aux étoiles et a
établie ainsi une _rotation sidérale_ où c'est pourtant assez clair,
que ce mouvement de la terre ne peut se rapporter qu'à lui-même.

Si le système de Copernic était fondé _sur la réalité_ et les planètes
circuleraient _toujours à la même place_, en verité autour du soleil
et dans des courves fermées, c'est bien clair qu'après une circulation
de 360° elles puissent revenir à la même place de leur orbite et dans
ce cas leur position en rapport à une étoile de comparaison pourrait
être, après une révolution accomplie de cette manière, la même; mais
comme _d'après les observations_ cette coïncidence avec l'étoile à
lieu dans des périodes _croissants_, il s'ensuit que le mouvement des
planètes _n'a pas lieu d'après le système de Copernic_ et que la
période révolutive des corps, qui forment le système solaire peuvent
se rapporter seulement à leur guide c. a. d. _au soleil_, et l'on peut
conclure avec certitude, que ces coïncidences de la position rélative
au ciel, tombe dans le même temps qu'elles conservent leur distance du
soleil et qu'elles se meuvent avec la même vitesse uniforme.

C'est bien compréhensible, que par suite des _orbites serpentant sans
cesse_, se produisent des coïncidence différentes et qu'ainsi
apparaissent périodiquement des différents phénomènes. Cette
circonstance fut la cause, pourquoi la _théorie_ attribue à la lune
_cinq divers temps de révolutions_. «_Révolution_» et «_temps de
révolution_», employés de cette manière n'ont plus aucune
signification, aucun sens; car d'après la nature de la chose, on n'a
qu'à rester _à une seule_ période révolutive.

Si nous nommons _orbites_ l'espace parcouru des planètes et de leurs
satellites _spirales sans fin_, le chemin du mouvement des corps
célestes décrit par elles, alors nous corporisons, pour faciliter, en
pensée, notre imagination. Nommons nous _le parcours d'un anneau
spirale etendue_, la description de 360° et la révolution accomplie,
nous rapportons cela au soleil et supposens, que les deux points
finales (commencement et fin) d'un anneau spirale ainsi réprésenté, se
trouvent dans la même ligne, c. a. d. si les points commencent d'une
spirale _coïncident_ avec le soleil à l'equinoque vernal, ses fins
coïncideront également avec le soleil après une révolution tropique
accomplie.

Ce système solaire, se mouvant sans fin et sens borne dans l'espace
infini, _ce cône_--un point en grandeur disparaissant dans
l'univers--qui parcourt dans une ligne de _double courbure_, contient
presque tout ce que l'homme peut distinctiment appercevoir au ciel;
les mouvemens et les positions toujours changeants sans fin, les
variations périodiques et séculaires etc. tout est là; c'est l'unité
de la science, le fondement de sa théorie; si on comprend le mouvement
dans l'espace, on n'a pas besoin de recourir à des _forces cachées_,
chaque explication est superflue, inutile, la nature s'explique
elle-même, supposé que l'homme soit capable de l'étudier.

  Remarque: Quelques lecteurs pourrait s'étonner de ce que nous
  faisons un usage trop fréquent de l'expression «cercle», mais
  après quelques réflections ils reconnaîtront eux-mêmes que ce mot
  a un sens bien étendu, qu'il conserve toujours encore, si nous
  transformont p. ex un cercle donné en différents flexions, qui lui
  donne une ou plusieurs courbures. Tous les espèces de lignes
  courbées, qui se laissent projeter comme cercle ou sont menées à
  360° peuvent être nommées circulaires. Ainsi on a p. ex decrit un
  cercle par la lettre _S_ ou avec le chiffre 2; la ligne
  serpentante, l'ellipse, la cycloide, et plusieurs espèce de
  spirales ect. se projetent comme circulaires et peuvent être
  considérer comme une partie sans fin, contenant 360° produit par
  la circulation. Le mot «circulation nous rapelle déjà un mouvement
  circulaire, sans que par cela un cercle soit immédiatement décrit;
  puisque une circulation accomplie ou une révolution dut contenir
  360°, c'est compréhensible, que ceux-ci se rapport au cercle. Le
  double mouvement courbé de la terre, comme nons nous la
  représentons par un _anneaux spirale cylindrique_, quand il s'agit
  d'une partie repondante à une période annuelle est en effet un
  cercle transformé en un anneaux spirale.




Autant que les astronomes négligent d'étudier avec soin attantif _les
apparitions célestes et leur signification_ et soutiendront avec
obstination la théorie astronomique actuelle, fondée sur les
suppositions et les imaginations de Copernic[B], Kepler et Newton,
l'astronomie comme elle est enseignée aujourd'hui, n'est rien de plus
qu'un jeu de phantasie.

  [B] Solis coelique stator.

Nous sommes persuadés, que le Bon-sens de l'homme
normal se décidera enfin de rejeter les idées des astronomes
sur la mécanique céleste professée aujourd'hui, même contre
les efforts des astronomes les plus célèbres à soutenir les
superstitions, qu'ils propagent, mais qui ne servent qu'à
flatter leur vanité.

Nous demandons pourquoi les astronomes n'ont-ils pas le courage de
s'élever contre le système solaire insoutenable et impossible fondé
sur le soleil fixe de Copernic, et pourquoi ne veulent-ils pas
_proposer_ un système fondé sur le soleil se mouvant dans l'espace?

Ils ont peur, comme Alexandre de Humboldt, de heurter au guêpier.[C]
Le courage moral leur manque de s'opposer à des idées généralement
acceptées et proclamées comme des vérités incontestables, mais qui ne
s'accordent pas à la réalité et qui sont même en contradiction avec
la théorie adoptée.

  [C] vide: L'astronomie et les astronomes, par A. Tischner 1893, p.
  39.

La présomption de tout savoir, est la vraie cause, qui empêche le
progrès. Nous espérons que la question soulevée par nous sera décidée
dans le siècle à venir.

Nous répétons, que nous n'attaquons pas _l'astronomie pratique_, mais
nous rejetons _la théorie de l'astronomie actuelle_ c. a. d.
l'explication des phénomènes célestes _apparents_.




Un grand astronome.

Himmel und Erde 1889, p. p. 333 und 334.


Mr. W. Meyer dit: «C'est bien compréhensible, _qu'il faut avoir appris
à connaitre les choses avec tous leurs d'étails, que l'on veut
expliquer_. C'est une supposition primitive, que malheureusement on ne
peut pas assez souvent répéter, aussi aujourd'hui, à des milliers de
têtes spéculatives, qui entreprennent de construire avec leur
phantaisie tout l'edifice du monde, à l'aide d'un material des
connaissances positives, à peine dignes de nommées. Ces architects du
monde, qui construisent tout l'univers dans une brochure de quelques
vingtaines ou trentaines de pages--qui sont en proportion très
harmoniques avec leur savoir--sont pour les astronomes une secte très
incommodes. Ces gens tiennent avec entêtement tout à fait inébranlable
à leurs idées fixes, et avec des arguments des science positives ce
n'est pas possible de les persuader. Une vieille experience enseigne
que ce serait une peine tout à fait vaine de les persuader de quelque
chose de meilleur et que malgré toute la bonne volonté et tout
l'enthousiasme on ne pourrait rependre une explication générale sur
cet objet. Contre de tels gens il faut se resoudre à une resignation
douloureuse et leurs laisser continuer tranquillement leur faux
chemin.»

Ainsi parle un Copernicain, qui ne peut pas comprendre, que quoique
depuis 1783, _le propre mouvement du soleil_ a été reconnu par
observation et qu'il se meut avec une vitesse de 30 Kilomètre par
seconde, la terre qui marche presque avec la même vitesse que le
soleil ne peut pas circuler autour du centre du soleil. Ou bien le
soleil se meut ou bien il ne se meut pas, mais de supposer le soleil
en repos sur la même place et se mouvant en même temps trente
Kilomètre par seconde, c'est un non-sens.

Mr. Wilhelm Meyer, né 1853, directeur de l'observatoire de la société
des actionaires «Urania» à Berlin, est un grand astronome, qui a
approfondit _tous les détailes_ de l'astronomie et de la mécanique
célestes et sait ce que se passe dans les replis les plus profonds de
l'espace céleste.




  =Sta, sol, ne moveare.= _August Tischner._ Leipzig 1881-1882.
     Gustav Fock.

  =Die Grösse, Entfernung und Masse der Sonne.= _August Tischner._
     Leipzig 1882. Gustav Fock.

  =The sun changes his position in space=, therefore he cannot be
     regarded as being «in a condition of rest». _August Tischner._
     Leipzig 1883. Gustav Fock.

  =The fixed Idea of astronomical Theory.= _August Tischner._ Leipzig
     1885. Gustav Fock.

  =L'Histoire de la découverte de la Planète Neptune, par Em.
     Liais.= Astronome de l'observatoire impérial de Paris.
     Reproduit de l'ouvrage: L'espace céleste et la nature tropical,
     Paris 1866. Par _Auguste Tischner_. Leipzig 1892. Gustav Fock.

  =Le mouvement de la Lumière.= _August Tischner._ Leipzig 1892.
     Gustav Fock.

  =Le pouvoir grossissant de l'Atmosphère.= _August Tischner._
     Leipzig 1892. Gustav Fock.

  =Le mouvement universel.= _August Tischner._ Leipzig 1893. Gustav
     Fock.

  =Les astronomes.= _August Tischner._ Leipzig 1893. Gustav Fock.

  =L'astronomie et les Astronomes.= _August Tischner._ Leipzig
     1893. Gustav Fock.




Littérature.


   1. =De orbitis planetarum.= _Georg Wilh. Hegel._ Jena 1801.

   2. =De l'imposibilité du système astronomique de Copernic et de
       Newton.= _L. J. Mercier._ Paris 1806.

   3. =Ueber Newton's, Euler's, Kästner's und Konsorten Pfuschereien
       in der Mathematik.= _Langsberg._ Heidelberg 1807.

   4. =Die Sonne bewegt sich.= Folgerungen aus dieser Lehre in Bezug
       auf die Fixsterne und Planeten. _C. R(ohrbach)._ Berlin 1852.

   5. =The solar System as it is, and not as it is represented.= _R.
       J. Morrison._ London 1857.

   6. =Mémoire sur le système solaire et sur l'explication des
       phénomènes célestes.= _Charles Nagy._ Paris 1862.

   7. =Considération sur les Comètes, éléments de Comètologie.=
       _Charles Nagy._ Paris 1862.

   8. =Die Sonne und die Astronomie.= _K. Nagy._ Leipzig 1866.

   9. =Das wahre Sonnensystem.= Bewegung und Bahnen der Gestirne nach
       einer neuen Auffassung über dieselben im Himmelsraume und
       zwar, welche nicht in Ellipsen statt hat. _James Milberg._
       München 1862.

  10. =Die wahre Gestalt der Planeten- und Cometenbahnen.= _Fried.
       Carl Gustav Stieber._ Dresden 1864.

  11. =Mathematische Sophismen.= _Joh. Viola._ Wien 1865.

  12. =Die absolute Bewegung der Himmelskörper und die wahre Natur
      der Dinge.= _Hugo Keifenheim._ Köln und Leipzig 1868.

  13. =Unumstösslicher Nachweis, dass die Erde nicht um die Sonne
      herumgehe.= _Xaver Schechner._ München 1868.

  14. =L'astronomie moderne.= _W. de Fonvielle._ Paris 1869.

  15. =Die Widersprüche in der Astronomie.= _C. Schöpffner._ Berlin
      1869.

  16. =Der Himmels-Mechanik Reform auf Grund der inductiven Logik.=
      _V. P. Kluck-Kluczycky._ 1880.

  17. =Nuevo sistema planetario.= _A. Morera._ Barcelona 1883.

  18. =Kritik der drei Kepler'schen Gesetze.= _Reindorf._
      Neuhaldesheim.

  19. =Ueber die Veranschaulichungsmittel für mathematische
      Geographie.= _F. A. Püschmann._ Grimma.

  20. =Système solaire d'après la march réelle du soleil.= _E. G.
      Fahrner._ 2me éd. Paris 1869.

  21. =Sterntafeln für alle Jahrhunderte von -2000 bis +1800.= _Dr.
      O. Danckwortt._

  22. =Freret. Défense de la chronologie, contre le système
      chronologique de Newton.= Paris 1758.

  23. =Mathematisch begründete Bedenken gegen das Kopernikanische
      Weltsystem.= _A. L. Dispek._ Frankfurt a. M. 1822.

  24. =Die Frage der Veränderlichkeit des Sonnendurchmessers.= _K.
      Remeis._ Leipzig 1880.

  25. =Das Mangelhafte der Newton'schen Gravitations-Theorie= v. _L.
      C. H. Boritsch_, gen. _Barnet_. Rostock 1866.

  26. =Discours préliminaire d'un système du monde, basé sur la
      propriété la plus général des corps.= _L. Delobel._ Bruxelles
      1846.




G. KREYSING, LEIPZIG.


Druck von G. Kreysing in Leipzig.





End of Project Gutenberg's Le Système Solaire se mouvant, by August Tischner

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LE SYSTÈME SOLAIRE SE MOUVANT ***

***** This file should be named 34435-8.txt or 34435-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/4/3/34435/

Produced by Thorsten Kontowski, Hélène de Mink and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This book was produced from scanned images of public
domain material from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
